In this lecture, you're going to learn about subnet masks, and you can see what I've done here is I've opened
up a command prompt on my Windows laptop again, and I've entered 'ipconfig'. You can see where I have
highlighted it that my IP address is 192.168.10.15,
my subnet mask is 255.255.255.0, and the default gateway is 192.168.10.1. So, every
host in your network is going to know what its IP address, its subnet mask, and its default gateway is.
Let's now see how it's going to use that information,
so onto the slides now. A host can send traffic directly to another host on the same subnet via the switches
they're attached to. But for a host to send traffic to another host in a different subnet, it must be
forwarded by a router.
So our routers are our devices that link our different subnets together and route the traffic between them.
The host, therefore, needs to understand if the destination is on the same or a different subnet in order
to know how to send it.
If the destination is on the same subnet, it will send that there directly.
If it's on a different subnet, it knows that it has to send it to the local router, which is the default
gateway. And the way that the host knows whether the destination is on the same subnet or a different
subnet is by comparing the IP address of the destination to its own IP address and the subnet mask.
The subnet mask, just like the IP address, is also 32 bits long, and it can be written in dotted decimal notation,
the same as our IP addresses,
or it can be written in slash '/' notation.
You'll see how that works a bit later in this lecture.
A host's IP address is divided into a network portion and a host portion, and it's the subnet mask that
defines where the boundary is between the network part and the host part of the address.
The easiest way to explain how this works is by giving you an example.
So, let's say the host's IP address is 192.168.10.15, and the subnet mask is 255.255.255.0.
That's the IP address and subnet mask that's actually on my laptop. To figure this out,
we write the IP address out in binary notation, like you learned in the last lecture, and then the subnet
mask
also in binary notation underneath. So our example was 192.168.10.15, subnet mask
255.255.255.0.
You see the top part here,
I've written 192.168.10.15 out in binary,
and then underneath 255.255.255.0 out in binary as well. The IP address is compared or masked with
the subnet mask. A '1' in the subnet mask indicates that bit in the IP address is part of the network address,
and a '0' indicates
that the bit is part of the host address. So very quickly, you can see here, all the 1's on the subnet mask
go up to here.
Everything in the IP address above that is part of the network portion of the address.
The 0's above that in the IP address, those are part of the host portion of the address.
Let's make this a little bit clearer. So, subnet mask 255.255.255.0. With the
subnet mask, it's always going to have contiguous 1's, and you see the 1's come up to this part here,
so I put a line in. That line is the border between the network portion and the host portion of the address.
In the example, the network address portion is 192.168.10 because on the IP address from here
on the left all way up to the line, that is 192.168.10 part of the IP address. Whatever is after
the line is the host portion of the address,
so in our example, it is the .15 is the host portion of the address. I've highlighted it there. There is the
network portion. If the host wants to communicate with another host with an IP address which also begins
with 192.168.10
in our example, so say, for example, this host wants to send traffic to a destination address of
192.168.10.20, it knows it's on the same subnet and it can send the traffic directly, because
the destination also begins with 192.168.10.
If this host wants to communicate with another host on any other network, anything that does not begin
with 192.168.10, then it knows it has to send the traffic via a router. So if it was sending traffic
to destination
192.168.11.20, for example, it doesn't begin with 192.168.10.
It's a different subnet, it sends it via the router. For a destination address to be on the same subnet,
the network portion has to be exactly 192.168.10.
Anything else means a different subnet,
we have to go via a router. The subnet mask always begins with a contiguous block of 1's.
This is different than the IP address.
You see our example IP address here, it's 1100000010101.
So with the IP address, the 1's and 0's can be mixed about in pretty much any order.
The subnet mask is a block of 1's, and then a block of 0's always. We never mix the 1's and 0's
up with each other in the subnet mask. So, 11111111.11110000.00000000.00000000 is a legal subnet mask.
11101101, mixing up the 1's and 0's,
we can't do that.
That is not a valid subnet mask.
The host portion of the address is available to be allocated to the different hosts on that particular
subnet,
for example, your PCs, Servers, Printers, Routers Interfaces, Switch Management Addresses, etc.,
with two exceptions that you'll see coming up after the next slide. So, there's the host portion of the address
for our example highlighted. The host portion of the address specifies the individual host and must be
unique on that subnet.
Your hosts do not need to be numbered sequentially.
For example, we could have a subnet with two hosts on it. One could have address 10.10.10.10.
The other could have addressed 10.10.10.20.
We don't need to number them .1 and .2.
You can't have two different hosts, both with the same IP address.
For example, we couldn't have two hosts, both with address 10.10.10.10. That would be
a duplicate address, and whenever any traffic was sent to 10.10.10.10, your network devices
wouldn't know which host to send it to.
So that's illegal, you can't have duplicate IP addresses.
You could have host 10.10.10.10 on one subnet and host 10.10.20.10
on a different subnet. They're different subnets, so it's not a duplicate address.
That's just fine.
All 0's in the host portion designates the network address and is not allowed to be allocated to a
host.
Remember, we just said a minute ago that there's two particular addresses that can not be assigned to
a host.
The first one of those is all 0's in the host portion. That designates the network address of the
network ID. In our example, the network address would be 192.168.10.0, so we fill
in the bit pattern in the network portion.
So, that was
192.168.10, and then in the host portion, we put all 0's in there. So all 0's, you can't assign it to
a host.
It signifies the network address, which is the bottom address in that particular subnet.
There's I highlighted there, you can see we've used all 0's.
The other address which can not be assigned to a host is all 1's in the host portion of the address.
All 0's signifies the network address, which is the bottom address in the range. All 1's, which
is the top address in the range, that is the directed broadcast.
Whenever you send traffic to the directed broadcast address, it goes to all hosts in that subnet.
Not to an individual host,
so we can't assign that address to an individual host. And there it is highlighted, the host portion, I've put
all 1's in there.
So that leaves 192.168.10.1 to 192.168.10.254,
in our example, available to be allocated to our different hosts. So all the different PCs, other kinds
of hosts, maybe you've got some Windows PCs, some Linux PCs in that subnet, I can number them from
192.168.10.1 all the way up to 192.168.10.254.
They're all in the same subnet. Whenever they send traffic to each other, they can do that directly without
going via their default gateway router.